art-of-storytelling/1-we-are-all-storytellers.md, before:

# We are all storytellers

## Introduction to storytelling
- "what happened?" as example of someone saying "tell me a story!"
- humans have told stories for a very long time
- stories connect us "on an emotional level"
- "write what you know" as meaning talk about your life and feelings
	- Monsters Inc was actually not about monster scares but about journey as a foster father
	- that's what Pete was going through after all
	- get the audience to feel the way you felt
- stories don't come out of heads perfectly
	- it takes retelling and lots of work

## Your unique perspective
- reminder: you are a storyteller
	- from the artists: on the playground, drawing comics, modding traces, making history-inspired posters
- idea generation: from life, own emotions (when did you smile or cry?), reflection, epiphanies
- your unique way of looking at things is your superpower!
- what's a memory that you have that's very vivid?

## Activity 1
- one vivid memory
- (see my Story Journal responses for 1.1)

## Your favorite stories
- narrative sequence of events through time
	- beginning
	- eventing
	- ending
- special stories are felt and pull you in
	- Christmas stop-motion Island of Misfit Toys resonated with one artist
	- Little Mermaid took another artist to another world
	- Killing Fields had a long, silent escape sequence where a character just has to survive
	- Lion King, Mufasa's death made another artist break down, growth but traumatic
- which three movies would you bring if you were a castaway on an island?

## Activity 2
- your three deserted island movies?
- (see my Story Journal)

## What if...
- movies take a long time and a lot of work but start with _world_ and _character_
- start with an _idea that inspires you_
- these ideas can be phrased as "what ifs"
	- what if a rat wanted to cook?
	- what if our toys were sentient?
- open imagination to explore a story
- how story artists use what-ifs:
	- they are questions that unlock doors
	- they engage with parts of brain that like to dream
	- "let yourself wonder"
- what-ifs kick of the creative process
	- concise communication of stories

## Activity 3
- take deserted island picks and reframe them as "what ifs"
- (see my Story Journal)

## World & character
- 

## Activity 4
- 

## Advice
- 

### Glossary
-

Commit message:

Complete notes and exercises for lesson 1 - Storytelling

art-of-storytelling/1-we-are-all-storytellers.md, after:

# We are all storytellers

## Introduction to storytelling
- "what happened?" as example of someone saying "tell me a story!"
- humans have told stories for a very long time
- stories connect us "on an emotional level"
- "write what you know" as meaning talk about your life and feelings
	- Monsters Inc was actually not about monster scares but about journey as a foster father
	- that's what Pete was going through after all
	- get the audience to feel the way you felt
- stories don't come out of heads perfectly
	- it takes retelling and lots of work

## Your unique perspective
- reminder: you are a storyteller
	- from the artists: on the playground, drawing comics, modding traces, making history-inspired posters
- idea generation: from life, own emotions (when did you smile or cry?), reflection, epiphanies
- your unique way of looking at things is your superpower!
- what's a memory that you have that's very vivid?

## Activity 1
- one vivid memory
- (see my Story Journal responses for 1.1)

## Your favorite stories
- narrative sequence of events through time
	- beginning
	- eventing
	- ending
- special stories are felt and pull you in
	- Christmas stop-motion Island of Misfit Toys resonated with one artist
	- Little Mermaid took another artist to another world
	- Killing Fields had a long, silent escape sequence where a character just has to survive
	- Lion King, Mufasa's death made another artist break down, growth but traumatic
- which three movies would you bring if you were a castaway on an island?

## Activity 2
- your three deserted island movies?
- (see my Story Journal)

## What if...
- movies take a long time and a lot of work but start with _world_ and _character_
- start with an _idea that inspires you_
- these ideas can be phrased as "what ifs"
	- what if a rat wanted to cook?
	- what if our toys were sentient?
- open imagination to explore a story
- how story artists use what-ifs:
	- they are questions that unlock doors
	- they engage with parts of brain that like to dream
	- "let yourself wonder"
- what-ifs kick of the creative process
	- concise communication of stories

## Activity 3
- take deserted island picks and reframe them as "what ifs"
- (see my Story Journal)

## World & character
- What-ifs connect to "world" and "character"
- worlds: literal vs figurative
- characters: individuals on journey through story
- examples of worlds and characters from movies
	- worlds promote character's struggle
	- worlds sometimes take a back seat to characters
	- different characters experience the same world differently
	- "character is king"
	- but some like to work on the world first then find a character fit
- story emerges from world + character

## Activity 4
- Find the world and character from previous favorites you gave
- (see my Story Journal)

## Advice
- think of yourself as a storyteller!
- storytelling is a challenge, so here's some advice:
	- errors are part of the search
	- get rid of erasers (or just use them to draw)
	- cultivate the emotion that drew you to that idea
	- get ideas out of your head and make it so others can connect to them
		- test ways to get viewers invested in the character just like you are
	- look back and see you're making progress
		- people who love this don't want to stop practicing
- we'll start digging into characters

### Glossary
- a _character_ is a subject/individual followed throughout the story's journey
- a _perspective_ is someone's point of view (how they see the _world_)
- a _protagonist_ is a main _character_ that is the focus of the story's journey
- a _story_ is a sequence of events unfolding over time
- a _world_ is an environment or ruleset in which the story happens
