art-of-storytelling/2-character.md, before:

# Character

## Introduction to character
- heuristics
	- characters trapped in an elevator: what would they do in a crisis?
	- example of someone freaking out vs calmly assessing, helping, getting through
- entertaining characters are "deeply flawed"
	- flaws are keys to audience interest
- learning lessons, facing challenges, feeling emotions
- other exercises for detecting how audience would care and share characters' emotions

## Warm up activity
- (Check out my Story Journal 1.5)
- basically, putting characters through the Elevator Test pushes them to extreme reactions

## Internal vs external features
- getting takes from story people on how to work with characters
	- how do they develop characters?
	- go from the simple (a fish) to complex characters people love
- "fully developed" characters can be imagined in almost any situation
	- as tough as "new life from scratch"
- character development at Pixar
	1. external features: design, clothes, look
	2. internal features: security, bravery, jealousy
- how to develop internal features
	- imagine having a conversation with a friend and getting to know their likes & dislikes
	- could start from external and see what that says about internal
		- not always straightforward: contrast if they look like a hero but feel like a villain
- where to get ideas
	- authentic experiences and emotions
	- not always about you
	- who have you known?
		- it's just like someone I knew
		- it's just like what my brother used to do
	- specifics about family and friends are hard to make up
	- thinking about Up, Carl's review of life with Ellie is silent
		- artist's father was in hospital unable to speak but communicating with eyes
- what drives a character through their journey?

## Activity 1
- Internal vs external features of characters from those 3 favorite films
- (Story Journal 1.6)

## Wants vs needs
- 

## Activity 2
- 

## Obstacles
- 

## Activity 3
-

Commit message:

Add notes and exercises on wants and needs for lesson 2 - Storytelling

art-of-storytelling/2-character.md, after:

# Character

## Introduction to character
- heuristics
	- characters trapped in an elevator: what would they do in a crisis?
	- example of someone freaking out vs calmly assessing, helping, getting through
- entertaining characters are "deeply flawed"
	- flaws are keys to audience interest
- learning lessons, facing challenges, feeling emotions
- other exercises for detecting how audience would care and share characters' emotions

## Warm up activity
- (Check out my Story Journal 2.0)
- basically, putting characters through the Elevator Test pushes them to extreme reactions

## Internal vs external features
- getting takes from story people on how to work with characters
	- how do they develop characters?
	- go from the simple (a fish) to complex characters people love
- "fully developed" characters can be imagined in almost any situation
	- as tough as "new life from scratch"
- character development at Pixar
	1. external features: design, clothes, look
	2. internal features: security, bravery, jealousy
- how to develop internal features
	- imagine having a conversation with a friend and getting to know their likes & dislikes
	- could start from external and see what that says about internal
		- not always straightforward: contrast if they look like a hero but feel like a villain
- where to get ideas
	- authentic experiences and emotions
	- not always about you
	- who have you known?
		- it's just like someone I knew
		- it's just like what my brother used to do
	- specifics about family and friends are hard to make up
	- thinking about Up, Carl's review of life with Ellie is silent
		- artist's father was in hospital unable to speak but communicating with eyes
- what drives a character through their journey?

## Activity 1
- Internal vs external features of characters from those 3 favorite films
- (Story Journal 2.1)

## Wants vs needs
- ignore external features for now
- what's in a character's mind?
	- ask: what does _this_ character _want_?
- story tie-ins
	- if you don't know what they want, where can they go? what can they do?
	- thinking of favorite characters, what do they want to do?
	- the character is compelled to do this every moment of every day
- character does things because _wants_ drive _actions_
- learning along the way: what they want may require sharing or recognizing others
- contrast these with what character _needs_
	- harder to admit
	- things character doesn't want to do
	- good relationships
- conflicts between wants and needs
	- create well-rounded characters
	- thrust in situation that conflicts with clear goals
	- thing you value vs what you need to care for right now
 	- in that monsters movie it's progressing in career vs caring for kid
- want drives character but need is the heart people remember

## Activity 2
- understand the wants and needs of yourself, your favorite characters and new characters
- (Story Journal 2.2)

## Obstacles
-

## Activity 3
-
