art-of-storytelling/4-visual-language.md, before:

# Visual Language

## Introduction to visual language
- use "simple visual cues" like one image to share so much
- size of something in the frame implies importance
  - show character smaller and place character in a larger space
    - depending on context, can show that they are vulnerable
    - or it can show the size of their world
  - you choose what you show on screen
  - _development art_: show key moments of story, use perspective
    - a small animal can look the same size as a human from the framing
- shape tells a lot, too
  - a ball might look nonthreatening, while a rectangle can look sturdy
  - triangular, pointy imply threatening, intimidating
- color can guide eyes
  - value (darkness) can really make something stand out
- size and shape can do work for the audience
  - get close and make character bigger in frame when they're the emotional focus
  - who is the strongest character in this moment?
- imagine how much and what you can communicate with visual language

## Line
- composition: organization of visuals in scene
  - line, shape, space, tone, movement, color
  - convey meaning and express emotions
- art and story departments come together here
  - fields
    - story art
    - character art
    - production design
  - tools / stages
    - storyboard: quick drawings sketching out story
      - put together storyboards before doing computer graphics
    - beatboard: visualize key moments at critical story points
    - concept art: key moments but polished, full color
      - show how light and color will look in the scene
    - final frame: visual snapshot of how it comes together in the film
- composition
  - visual space to expand or contract focus and center visual gaze
  - character eyes make you focus on a character's gaze
- line qualities
  - change direction: where does it point?
  - change weight: thick or thin?
  - change shape
  - change pressure when drawing
  - change length
- line meaning
  - use quality to express meaning
  - example: nervous lines are jittery and thin
  - example: angry lines are thick, fast and double back on themselves
  - example: calm lines are long and have small, gentle curves
- complexity of lines in scenes
  - consider how lines run through a scene
  - vibrating lines for energy around windowsil in a final frame
  - doubled-up, hariy lines in beatboard frame for scattered movement
  - hair lines atop a character make them feel wild, less containable
- assignment: use lines and move them around to visualize character traits
- these penstrokes bring life and emotion into your world

## Activity 1
- think about line direction, weight, shape, pressure
- be expressive, not careful
- (see Story Journal 4.1)

## Shape
- even primitive shapes convey emotion
  - triangles have direction, speed, tension
  - circles are friendly
  - squares are stable
- characters may start out as multiple shapes put together
  - square body but circle head
  - friendly circle but active triangle for happy but speedy
- add detail by adding and connecting shapes
- silhouettes as a good way to get a sense of the emotions conveyed
- two characters can be opposites: drab square vs colorful circle
- shape really matters in scene composition
  - find motion in triangles
  - find the circular curves
  - look for rectangles like windows
- intimidating shape: skinny, thin, tall
  - look for things it reminds you of (a coffin, )
- use shapes to block out where viewer should look
- think of how rounded shapes soften a hero while sharper ones add dynamism
- boxes may look slow and sturdy but can frame faster, dynamic characters

## Activity 2
- take time to think more about shape
- (see Story Journal 4.2)

## Space
- we've already used visual language to talk about space
- consider vanishing points: how things get closer in the distance
- linear perspective: vertical lines coming together simulate distance
  - heavier line weights at the bottom of frame
  - place elements in frame to support the visuals
  - combine it with size to simulate even more depth
- vanishing points help predict how forms look in the distance
- consider an example of squishing a character in space
  - place obstacles to make a character stand out as not where they're supposed to be
  - maybe a main character is struggling with goals
- aim lines back in depth to force focus even to small-sized characters
- remove visual cues from the environment to play with space and perspective
  - be careful because this will show just how much we rely on these cues

## Activity 3
- consider the illusion of depth and how to draw it
- (see Story Journal 4.3)

## Motion
- still images can suggest movement
- techniques include motion lines and line of action
- motion lines extend along a pathway to create appearance of movement
- line of action follows spine and feels out force of the character
- even when shapes don't normally move (like squares) techniques can make movement
  - adding triangles can point in a direction
  - curves can point upwards like in a character's pose
  - heavy square shapes can anchor down to the ground
  - diagonals can lean a character especially combined with a line of action
  - character eyes looking in a direction
- use contrasts to show that one character moves more than others
- lines of action can really suggest a lot about a character, like grace

## Activity 4
- consider movement in a still image and in chosen movies
- (see Story Journal 4.4)

## Tone
-

Commit message:

Add notes and exercise for visual language tone - Storytelling

art-of-storytelling/4-visual-language.md, after:

# Visual Language

## Introduction to visual language
- use "simple visual cues" like one image to share so much
- size of something in the frame implies importance
  - show character smaller and place character in a larger space
    - depending on context, can show that they are vulnerable
    - or it can show the size of their world
  - you choose what you show on screen
  - _development art_: show key moments of story, use perspective
    - a small animal can look the same size as a human from the framing
- shape tells a lot, too
  - a ball might look nonthreatening, while a rectangle can look sturdy
  - triangular, pointy imply threatening, intimidating
- color can guide eyes
  - value (darkness) can really make something stand out
- size and shape can do work for the audience
  - get close and make character bigger in frame when they're the emotional focus
  - who is the strongest character in this moment?
- imagine how much and what you can communicate with visual language

## Line
- composition: organization of visuals in scene
  - line, shape, space, tone, movement, color
  - convey meaning and express emotions
- art and story departments come together here
  - fields
    - story art
    - character art
    - production design
  - tools / stages
    - storyboard: quick drawings sketching out story
      - put together storyboards before doing computer graphics
    - beatboard: visualize key moments at critical story points
    - concept art: key moments but polished, full color
      - show how light and color will look in the scene
    - final frame: visual snapshot of how it comes together in the film
- composition
  - visual space to expand or contract focus and center visual gaze
  - character eyes make you focus on a character's gaze
- line qualities
  - change direction: where does it point?
  - change weight: thick or thin?
  - change shape
  - change pressure when drawing
  - change length
- line meaning
  - use quality to express meaning
  - example: nervous lines are jittery and thin
  - example: angry lines are thick, fast and double back on themselves
  - example: calm lines are long and have small, gentle curves
- complexity of lines in scenes
  - consider how lines run through a scene
  - vibrating lines for energy around windowsil in a final frame
  - doubled-up, hariy lines in beatboard frame for scattered movement
  - hair lines atop a character make them feel wild, less containable
- assignment: use lines and move them around to visualize character traits
- these penstrokes bring life and emotion into your world

## Activity 1
- think about line direction, weight, shape, pressure
- be expressive, not careful
- (see Story Journal 4.1)

## Shape
- even primitive shapes convey emotion
  - triangles have direction, speed, tension
  - circles are friendly
  - squares are stable
- characters may start out as multiple shapes put together
  - square body but circle head
  - friendly circle but active triangle for happy but speedy
- add detail by adding and connecting shapes
- silhouettes as a good way to get a sense of the emotions conveyed
- two characters can be opposites: drab square vs colorful circle
- shape really matters in scene composition
  - find motion in triangles
  - find the circular curves
  - look for rectangles like windows
- intimidating shape: skinny, thin, tall
  - look for things it reminds you of (a coffin, )
- use shapes to block out where viewer should look
- think of how rounded shapes soften a hero while sharper ones add dynamism
- boxes may look slow and sturdy but can frame faster, dynamic characters

## Activity 2
- take time to think more about shape
- (see Story Journal 4.2)

## Space
- we've already used visual language to talk about space
- consider vanishing points: how things get closer in the distance
- linear perspective: vertical lines coming together simulate distance
  - heavier line weights at the bottom of frame
  - place elements in frame to support the visuals
  - combine it with size to simulate even more depth
- vanishing points help predict how forms look in the distance
- consider an example of squishing a character in space
  - place obstacles to make a character stand out as not where they're supposed to be
  - maybe a main character is struggling with goals
- aim lines back in depth to force focus even to small-sized characters
- remove visual cues from the environment to play with space and perspective
  - be careful because this will show just how much we rely on these cues

## Activity 3
- consider the illusion of depth and how to draw it
- (see Story Journal 4.3)

## Motion
- still images can suggest movement
- techniques include motion lines and line of action
- motion lines extend along a pathway to create appearance of movement
- line of action follows spine and feels out force of the character
- even when shapes don't normally move (like squares) techniques can make movement
  - adding triangles can point in a direction
  - curves can point upwards like in a character's pose
  - heavy square shapes can anchor down to the ground
  - diagonals can lean a character especially combined with a line of action
  - character eyes looking in a direction
- use contrasts to show that one character moves more than others
- lines of action can really suggest a lot about a character, like grace

## Activity 4
- consider movement in a still image and in chosen movies
- (see Story Journal 4.4)

## Tone
- also called _shading_, changing lightness and darkness
- light values can feel open, fun while dark values can feel mysterious
- _contrast_ is the use of "neighboring light and dark values"
  - low is subdued
  - high is exciting, dramatic, conflicting
  - eyes move to the place of highest contrast
  - play together with perspective to draw eyes to a point
- pull towards characters by having them against a contrasting background
  - frame them by having the edges more muddled in tone
  - if things still feel dark then pull in a light to have tones meet
  - a rim light might really pull together the lighting and characters
- tone can focus eyes by using tone as shape
  - this can "create a stage"
- gradient can give mood, maybe adding haze

## Activity 5
- consider tone in a still and draw out some simple shading
- (see Story Journal 4.5)

## Color
-
