art-of-storytelling/story-journal.md, before:

# Story Journal

## Activity 1.1: Expressing memories
Part A:
(I'm thinking of the memory I'll share in Part C.)

Part B:
It's a complicated memory, combining joy and fear with a streak of disgust.

Part C:
One summer afternoon back in my high school days, I was upstairs in my old room, stretched out on the floor, head propped up, paper in front of me, pencil in hand, sketching away. Outside I could hear a bunch of my neighborhood friends playing. Eventually they started calling up to my window. I ignored their voices. They knocked on the door and now my parents were pushing me to go outside and play, too. I kept waving them all off. See, I had been suffering from a combination of acne plus some bad skin allergies that left deep scars all over my face, and I found it uncomfortably taxing to face other people at the time, even close friends. But, even with that anxiety, all of their uncomplicated care for me left me with a warm memory of love and community I still feel when I remember that day.

## Activity 1.2: Your three favorite films
Part A:
1. 7 Samurai
2. Fresh Prince (or Anchorman if we can't opt for a series)
3. Moana
4. (Honorable mentions: Spanish Prisoner and Death Note)

Part B:
1. gripping heroic underdog story with the weight of history behind it
2. fish-out-of-water comedy that's silly but warm and memorable from my earlier years with friends
3. beautifully realized world and reconnection to the past full of heart and discovery
4. subdued, thoughty but still kind of silly suspense that reminds me of old movies with family

Part C:
All have clear background stories that play a strong role in setting up situations throughout, they have multiple twists and sidestories, yet they focus on establishing compelling/memorable characters over weaving a complex narrative. They don't have one-off twists or plot-heavy suspense that make it less rewatchable for me in multiple viewings (with the exception of my honorable mentions). Above all for me, they were stories shared with close friends and family at some point in my life, that defined my personal relationship with film and with people.

## Activity 1.3
Part A:
1. What if a feudal village couldn't pay debts and convinced wandering warriors to protect them?
2. What if a scrappy East Coast kid got in trouble and was sent to live with his wealthy West Coast uncle?
3. What if there was an island people were not allowed to leave, but the land and crops turned bad?
	- (... and a restless young ali'i who discovered they owed their culture to ocean navigators)
4. one for each of my honorable mentions:
	- What if an average guy goes on vacation but gets ensnared in a deep multinational conspiracy?
	- What if a smart high school kid finds a notebook that lets you kill anyone just by inking their name onto a page?

Part B:
1. What if coral became sentient and put humans on trial?
2. What if history started going backwards slowly and only you (an archivist) noticed it?
3. What if a tree has been growing for centuries and now a border chops it in half?
4. What if a magic piggy bank brought back to life any figure who's head is on a coin that's dropped in?
5. What if a young girl suddenly sees the animals she's eaten come back to life, and has to deal with it with friends and family?
6. What if a smart but struggling college dropout starts getting top-secret text messages from world leaders?

## Activity 1.4
Part A:
For stories mentioned above, identify: main characters, character you connect with, worlds
1. Samurai and villagers, the funny brash non-samurai, in one town
2. the prince + family + butler, the star but esp interactions with preppy cousin, in one fancy house
3. ali'i + traveling companions, hero but specifically in moments of connecting with past, an island + surrounding ocean but other embedded mythic worlds

Part B:
Mix up the characters and worlds. What happens?
1. An ali'i and her traveling companions try to protect a small village, venturing out for help from the gods
2. Wandering samurai end up living in a fancy West Coast house
3. the fresh prince got on the wrong one-way flight, ends up on a dying island and has to help
The results are mostly comical, with interesting conflicts apparent, except the first. It's more serious and may already be an anime.

Part C:
Imagine a character and world from a favorite what-if from the answers to 1.3.
The history-starts-going-backwards story calls for a nerdy archivist who's spent life arguing for digital preservation. She's suddenly thrust into a situation she slowly realizes calls for her unique skills. The character's world feels like a small city, small enough to score a job as the familiar face in a local library but big enough to be forgettable. Scenes establish this is happening around the globe.

Part D:
What would life be like in the world from part C?
I think it would feel dull and mundane at first, and for everyone living it day to day. For the character (or characters?) who realize what's going on, it feels like a revelation, maybe followed by a dose of futility.

## Activity 1.5: Elevator Test
Step 1: Character from your favorite films
The Fresh Prince would not notice it at first, then look around, fake playing it cool. (I'm aright, 's aright.) Depending who's trapped with him, he starts escalating and making the situation worse. Then at some point he totally freaks out and lets out his signature scream. Once he's free, he totally plays it off like he was a strong survivor and whoever was in there with him actually flipped out.

Step 2: Character you are creating
The archivist gets quiet. Not out of fear. She's industrious. She looks around to collect evidence of what's going on. Other people are getting nervous, but she's alert. She tells a couple sarcastic jokes to lighten the mood, but this actually aggravates one of the fearful members in the party. The situation gets really tense, but by the end, she's found a way out.

## Activity 1.6: Internal vs External
Part A: main characters
1. funny prince
2. girl ali'i
3. smart high school student

Part B: external features
1. bright clothes, wide range of frequency in voice, hi-top fade, big smile
2. long hair, active hands, wide eyes, comes with a companion
3. sharp eyes, hunched over desk, pen, friendly chatter, long pauses

Part C: internal features
1. funny, silly, heartwarming, charming, accepting, not quite fitting in
2. curious, adventurous, determined, loyal, conflicted
3. intelligent, logical, one step ahead, dismissive, certain, superior

Part D: features of someone you know
external: cuddly short fur, beady eyes, beanbag body, lost nose, side hole
internal: anger at humanity, desire to consume, strong sense of justice, tribalism

Part E: one of your characters you're developing
external:
- human
- wearing kind of plain antique clothes, shades of dust and sepia
- moves cautiously but deliberately
- first thing you'd notice would be the backpack and glasses
internal:
- likes trying unfamiliar cuisines, new technology for function not form, close friends, cats
- fears clocks, own past, mean people getting the upper hand
- emotion most often felt is a combination of joy + disgust
- if trapped in an elevator, assessing, problem solving and snarky comments would ensue

Commit message:

Add notes and exercises on wants and needs for lesson 2 - Storytelling

art-of-storytelling/story-journal.md, after:

# Story Journal

## Activity 1.1: Expressing memories
Part A:
(I'm thinking of the memory I'll share in Part C.)

Part B:
It's a complicated memory, combining joy and fear with a streak of disgust.

Part C:
One summer afternoon back in my high school days, I was upstairs in my old room, stretched out on the floor, head propped up, paper in front of me, pencil in hand, sketching away. Outside I could hear a bunch of my neighborhood friends playing. Eventually they started calling up to my window. I ignored their voices. They knocked on the door and now my parents were pushing me to go outside and play, too. I kept waving them all off. See, I had been suffering from a combination of acne plus some bad skin allergies that left deep scars all over my face, and I found it uncomfortably taxing to face other people at the time, even close friends. But, even with that anxiety, all of their uncomplicated care for me left me with a warm memory of love and community I still feel when I remember that day.

## Activity 1.2: Your three favorite films
Part A:
1. 7 Samurai
2. Fresh Prince (or Anchorman if we can't opt for a series)
3. Moana
4. (Honorable mentions: Spanish Prisoner and Death Note)

Part B:
1. gripping heroic underdog story with the weight of history behind it
2. fish-out-of-water comedy that's silly but warm and memorable from my earlier years with friends
3. beautifully realized world and reconnection to the past full of heart and discovery
4. subdued, thoughty but still kind of silly suspense that reminds me of old movies with family

Part C:
All have clear background stories that play a strong role in setting up situations throughout, they have multiple twists and sidestories, yet they focus on establishing compelling/memorable characters over weaving a complex narrative. They don't have one-off twists or plot-heavy suspense that make it less rewatchable for me in multiple viewings (with the exception of my honorable mentions). Above all for me, they were stories shared with close friends and family at some point in my life, that defined my personal relationship with film and with people.

## Activity 1.3
Part A:
1. What if a feudal village couldn't pay debts and convinced wandering warriors to protect them?
2. What if a scrappy East Coast kid got in trouble and was sent to live with his wealthy West Coast uncle?
3. What if there was an island people were not allowed to leave, but the land and crops turned bad?
	- (... and a restless young ali'i who discovered they owed their culture to ocean navigators)
4. one for each of my honorable mentions:
	- What if an average guy goes on vacation but gets ensnared in a deep multinational conspiracy?
	- What if a smart high school kid finds a notebook that lets you kill anyone just by inking their name onto a page?

Part B:
1. What if coral became sentient and put humans on trial?
2. What if history started going backwards slowly and only you (an archivist) noticed it?
3. What if a tree has been growing for centuries and now a border chops it in half?
4. What if a magic piggy bank brought back to life any figure who's head is on a coin that's dropped in?
5. What if a young girl suddenly sees the animals she's eaten come back to life, and has to deal with it with friends and family?
6. What if a smart but struggling college dropout starts getting top-secret text messages from world leaders?

## Activity 1.4
Part A:
For stories mentioned above, identify: main characters, character you connect with, worlds
1. Samurai and villagers, the funny brash non-samurai, in one town
2. the prince + family + butler, the star but esp interactions with preppy cousin, in one fancy house
3. ali'i + traveling companions, hero but specifically in moments of connecting with past, an island + surrounding ocean but other embedded mythic worlds

Part B:
Mix up the characters and worlds. What happens?
1. An ali'i and her traveling companions try to protect a small village, venturing out for help from the gods
2. Wandering samurai end up living in a fancy West Coast house
3. the fresh prince got on the wrong one-way flight, ends up on a dying island and has to help
The results are mostly comical, with interesting conflicts apparent, except the first. It's more serious and may already be an anime.

Part C:
Imagine a character and world from a favorite what-if from the answers to 1.3.
The history-starts-going-backwards story calls for a nerdy archivist who's spent life arguing for digital preservation. She's suddenly thrust into a situation she slowly realizes calls for her unique skills. The character's world feels like a small city, small enough to score a job as the familiar face in a local library but big enough to be forgettable. Scenes establish this is happening around the globe.

Part D:
What would life be like in the world from part C?
I think it would feel dull and mundane at first, and for everyone living it day to day. For the character (or characters?) who realize what's going on, it feels like a revelation, maybe followed by a dose of futility.

## Activity 2.0: Elevator Test
Step 1: Character from your favorite films
The Fresh Prince would not notice it at first, then look around, fake playing it cool. (I'm aright, 's aright.) Depending who's trapped with him, he starts escalating and making the situation worse. Then at some point he totally freaks out and lets out his signature scream. Once he's free, he totally plays it off like he was a strong survivor and whoever was in there with him actually flipped out.

Step 2: Character you are creating
The archivist gets quiet. Not out of fear. She's industrious. She looks around to collect evidence of what's going on. Other people are getting nervous, but she's alert. She tells a couple sarcastic jokes to lighten the mood, but this actually aggravates one of the fearful members in the party. The situation gets really tense, but by the end, she's found a way out.

## Activity 2.1: Internal vs External
Part A: main characters
1. funny prince
2. girl ali'i
3. smart high school student

Part B: external features
1. bright clothes, wide range of frequency in voice, hi-top fade, big smile
2. long hair, active hands, wide eyes, comes with a companion
3. sharp eyes, hunched over desk, pen, friendly chatter, long pauses

Part C: internal features
1. funny, silly, heartwarming, charming, accepting, not quite fitting in
2. curious, adventurous, determined, loyal, conflicted
3. intelligent, logical, one step ahead, dismissive, certain, superior

Part D: features of someone you know
external: cuddly short fur, beady eyes, beanbag body, lost nose, side hole
internal: anger at humanity, desire to consume, strong sense of justice, tribalism

Part E: one of your characters you're developing
external:
- human
- wearing kind of plain antique clothes, shades of dust and sepia
- moves cautiously but deliberately
- first thing you'd notice would be the backpack and glasses
internal:
- likes trying unfamiliar cuisines, new technology for function not form, close friends, cats
- fears clocks, own past, mean people getting the upper hand
- emotion most often felt is a combination of joy + disgust
- if trapped in an elevator, assessing, problem solving and snarky comments would ensue

## Activity 2.2: Wants vs Needs
Part A: wants and needs of your favorite characters
1. wants: to be popular, liked, funny and a star, needs: to fit in and mature
2. wants: to explore, needs: to care for people
3. wants: to control people, ? needs: some amount of validation, some sense of accomplishment

Part B: your wants and needs
- I'll have to come back to this but here's a first sketch...
- wants: uncover and explore adventurous problems, needs: companionship and support, to eat

Part C: wants and needs of a character you're developing
- I'll also have to revisit this but I'll throw a couple out
- what they want the most: to make the world realize it needs to save precious data from falling into decay
- what they want to become: a top name recognized in their field
- what do they need to succeed: help from other people (all oblivious to what's going on)
